
# Physical Zones

!!! Note: This feature is only available in MAAS versions 1.5 and above.

To help you maximise fault-tolerance and performance of the services you
deploy, MAAS administrators can define *physical zones* (or just *zones*
for short), and assign nodes to them. When a user requests a node, they
can ask for one that is in a specific zone, or one that is not in a
specific zone.

It’s up to you as an administrator to decide what a physical zone should
represent: it could be a server rack, a room, a data centre, machines
attached to the same UPS, or a portion of your network. Zones are most
useful when they represent portions of your infrastructure. But you
could also use them simply to keep track of where your systems are
located.

Each node is in one and only one physical zone. Each MAAS instance ships
with a default zone to which nodes are attached by default. If you do
not need this feature, you can simply pretend it does not exist.

## Applications

Since you run your own MAAS, its physical zones give you more
flexibility than those of a third-party hosted cloud service. That means
that you get to design your zones and define what they mean. Below are
some examples of how physical zones can help you get the most out of
your MAAS.

### Using Zones for Fault Tolerance

If you are concerned about availability of services you deploy through
MAAS, a physical zone could be on one power supply, or it could be an
entire data centre location, or an area of your network that is unlikely
to suffer problems when another zone experiences an outage.

For example, you might roll out separate instances of the same web
application into different physical zones of the same MAAS, and either
load-balance between them or keep one as a warm stand-by. If one zone
suffers a power loss, is cut off from the internet, or is affected by a
natural disaster, the other instance of your application may still be
available in the other zone, and ready to take over.

For fault tolerance, machines that work together in order to provide one
instance of a service should generally be allocated in the same zone.
The entire service should have a backup instance in another zone.

### Using Zones for Performance

Even if fault tolerance is not an issue, you may still want to divide
your nodes into groups that communicate efficiently through a
high-performance local network, or share efficient access to external
resources.

When it comes to performance, machines should generally be allocated in
the zone closest to performance-critical resources they need.

For example, for applications that are highly sensitive to network
latency, it may make sense to divide your MAAS into smaller physical
networks, and represent each of those networks as a physical zone. Now,
you can use the physical zones to allocate nodes just where they get the
best performance when communicating with specific other nodes.

In another example, your application may rely on a third-party service
available on the internet. If your MAAS is spread out across multiple
data centre locations, you may want the application to be deployed in
the location with the best access to that service.

### Using Zones for Power Management

If you are concerned about power density and cooling, you can lay out
your physical zones to match server racks. Instead of allocating
machines that share a physical zone, you can spread out the load by
ensuring that “hot” systems are in located different zones.

## Creating a Zone


Only administrators can create and manage zones. To create a physical
zone in the web user interface, log in as an administrator and browse to
the “Zones” section in the top bar. This will takes you to the zones
listing page. At the bottom of the page is a button for creating a new
zone:

![](../media/add-zone.png)

Or to do it in the 
[region-controller API](api.html#region-controller-api), 
POST your zone definition to the
*“zones”* endpoint.

## Assigning Nodes to a Zone

Once you have created one or more physical zones, you can set nodes’
zones from the nodes listing page in the UI. Select the nodes for which
you wish to set a zone, and choose “Set physical zone” from the “Bulk
action” dropdown list near the top. A second dropdown list will appear,
to let you select which zone you wish to set. Leave it blank to clear
nodes’ physical zones. Clicking “Go” will apply the change to the
selected nodes.

You can also set an individual node’s zone on its “Edit node” page. Both
ways are available in the API as well: edit an individual node through a
`PUT`{.docutils .literal} request to the node’s URI, or set the zone on
multiple nodes at once by calling the `set_zone`{.docutils .literal}
operation on the `nodes`{.docutils .literal} endpoint.

## Allocating a Node in a Zone

To deploy in a particular zone, call the `acquire`{.docutils .literal}
method in the [*region-controller API*](api.html#region-controller-api)
as before, but pass the `zone`{.docutils .literal} parameter with the
name of the zone. The method will allocate a node in that zone, or fail
with an HTTP 409 (“conflict”) error if the zone has no nodes available
that match your request.

Alternatively, you may want to request a node that is *not* in a
particular zone, or one that is not in any of several zones. To do that,
specify the `not_in_zone`{.docutils .literal} parameter to
`acquire`{.docutils .literal}. This parameter takes a list of zone
names; the allocated node will not be in any of them. Again, if that
leaves no nodes available that match your request, the call will return
a “conflict” error.

It is possible, though not usually useful, to combine the
`zone`{.docutils .literal} and `not_in_zone`{.docutils .literal}
parameters. If your choice for `zone`{.docutils .literal} is also
present in `not_in_zone`{.docutils .literal}, no node will ever match
your request. Or if it’s not, then the `not_in_zone`{.docutils .literal}
values will not affect the result of the call at all.


